The 1981 version of the film, complete
with fragments removed by the censors.
TOR Film Studio
Noooo!!!
in
BLIND CHANCE
Written and Directed by
Go on, write it down.
17 - 9 = 8
Good. Your mother wrote
her 8s the same way.
Daniel!
I'm not going as far as I thought.
Only to Denmark.
I'll write to you.
It's not an internal matter
for the school any more.
Let's go through the names.
- Łubin.
- Fairly obvious.
Who was he?
A Prime Minister. Caught making out
with a custodian last year.
That's even worse.
We can transfer him.
Kamiński has three failing grades,
also obvious.
- How about Długosz?
- Who was he?
- Minister of Health.
- He's a half-orphan.
Great grades, exemplary
behavior.
Has leadership skills
but everybody likes him.
Fuck her!
What's wrong?
She used to be my teacher.
I hated her.
You've never noticed
me before, have you?
You'd get skates or a bike but
I never liked your good grades.
You knew that, didn't you?
You know what made
me really happy?
You beating up a teacher
when you were thirteen.
Nothing but straight Cs
after that.
I never liked overachievers.
Especially in life.
And that included your school.
You're still here?
Kasia, this is my son.
Witek.
- The room is only ours for an hour.
- I have to make a call.
You always call and
never say a thing.
- Witek? Is that you?
- Yes.
Yes, Dad.
They're taking me
to the hospital. Kasia's here.
In case I don't see you...
You don't have to do anything.
- Do what?
- Nothing at all.
Dad!
My father.
Pissing or puking?
You're lucky.
- You lost your vocation?
- That's right.
And?
My late father
wanted me to be a doctor.
But on his deathbed he told me
he didn't want it anymore.
I need some time to think.
- Of course. Though it's a pity.
- You've got milk whiskers, sir.
The train to Warsaw East Station
will depart from Platform 2.
Are you blind?
- You'll break your neck!
- Sorry.
He spilled all my change...
A beer, please.
A student ticket to Warsaw.
One to Łomża.
You were lucky.
- You could've missed it.
- Yeah. I almost have.
Feet off the seat!
- May I go to the restroom?
- Go.
Don't get lost on the way.
Scram. It's your chance.
I'll give you my sneakers.
He wouldn't run?
No.
Sometimes people don't run.
Because they don't want to.
Repeated beatings
on the shinbone
leave you with
a permanent limp.
It used to taste better...
I pleaded guilty at the trial.
But it took me time to realize
that standing for my ideals
meant admitting to
things I've never done or thought.
And Krystyna was waiting...
for freedom.
- Did I tell you what she was like?
- You did.
Everything about her was pale.
Somewhat peculiar for a woman
who had some fair fuzz above her
upper lip and near her ears.
And large, ugly hands.
Maybe that was why I touched her.
Because of her imperfections.
She couldn't take her ring
off those fat fingers...
When Adam was arrested in 1949.
Back then, in 1949,
it meant that he was a spy.
He wasn't, but who cared?
It took me a year
to convince her.
And so, I've moved in with her.
- We called already?
- Yes. No answer.
And now?
I still believe, but do they?
When they arrested me
and I pleaded guilty
she started to doubt whether
she was married to a spy.
Even though
I convinced her she was.
That's why she couldn't believe
that I also was against
the Party and Communism.
She stopped believing the Party.
She only believed herself.
We were in the same prison.
She would visit both of us.
We walked past one another...
She was even whiter and paler then
and had that fuzz above her lip.
Dial. 45-21-95.
- Hello?
- Ask for Krystyna.
It's a public phone,
hence the poor connection.
May I talk to Krystyna, please?
Say you're from the Institute.
I'm from the Institute.
Hello, it's me. Krystyna?
I came back a few hours ago.
But you weren't there...
No trouble sleeping lately?
What?
Hania?
You're a grandmother?
I was away for a few days
and I'm leaving again soon
so I haven't done any shopping.
No, I can't eat at this hour.
- Well?
- Have I shown you her picture?
I haven't and I won't.
I hope you meet her some day.
This picture is thirty years old,
and I don't want you to have
too specific ideas about those times.
When did you get out?
Not soon enough. They started
releasing spies in 1954.
Us, the "dissenters", were
kept longer.
By the time I got out,
they'd been together for over a year.
And you?
I was given this apartment, and
moved in... For good, I suppose.
And here is where
you believe in all that?
Here... and anywhere else.
Maybe being here
makes it easier to believe.
I'm sort of... more equal here.
Mind you, after prison I never
wanted to be less equal.
Not that I didn't get
tempting offers.
Some of my fellow inmates
had a lot to offer.
But you can see
what's happening to all that.
It's very simple.
If we didn't manage to do it,
maybe this generation will.
You, for instance.
- Want a blanket?
- Yes, please.
Go to bed. I'll stay up
a little longer.
There is another
blanket on the bed.
I have several blankets...
My father died ten days ago.
I didn't make it to his bedside.
But I got his final message:
there's nothing I have to do.
Witek! Come here.
- This is Mr. Długosz.
- What's he doing?
Fourth year of medical school,
currently on Dean's leave.
Second thoughts about
becoming a doctor?
Yes.
So, now we know everything.
See if we can get started.
- Have you read this?
- Yes.
Any comments?
I agree with what you write.
You write well.
It's pretty much all
that you do well.
We're ready for you.
- You want to listen?
- I'd love to.
- Werner is leaving in three weeks.
- And for a long time.
Should you need anything,
let me know.
I know exactly what I want to say.
I don't need notes.
I wish to present my current views
on the concept
I've adhered to for forty years.
Each generation desires
some kind of light;
needs assurance and faith
that the world can be just
and better organized.
This desire, older than Marx
and younger than Marx,
is like a drug.
At the beginning, it brings joy
because the light
seems within reach.
Towards the end,
it brings bitterness
as you realize it's drifted far away.
I've been through a lot
in those last forty years.
And now, the light is much
more distant than it's ever been.
I shouldn't encourage you
to take this road but trust me,
without that bitterness,
without that hope
life would be pathetic.
Relax. She's short-sighted
and doesn't wear glasses.
- Wait a second.
- Sure.
Chili? Chili!
You don't recognize me?
Hi.
May I kiss your hand?
Witek!
- Can we talk?
- Sure.
Will you wait?
Who is he?
My first love.
I'll be right back.
Goodbye then. Remember to
switch off the gas.
Wait...
Adam gave me his card.
In case I needed anything...
- So?
- I'm not sure what to do.
Do as you please.
Applying for a passport?
No. For Party membership.
Pity we didn't sleep together
when we were seventeen.
Farmer? There is Stanisławski.
Sportsman Jacek Wszoła.
Zimerman, of course!
Engineer? I'm not sure.
It says "mechanic" here.
Buzek. Yes, I'll double-check.
Idziak and Buzek.
May I?
Excuse me, there's a problem
with the list of young Poles...
- They're asking who these are.
- Close the door.
- Who is he?
- Witek.
Please sit down, Witek.
Join us.
We have a problem. There is
a riot in one of our detox centers.
- I don't follow.
- Junkies. Grass, acid...
Drug addicts.
We took them under our wing.
Restaffed the centre with
young doctors and nurses.
But they say they don't want
the young ones.
And threaten to set the place on fire.
The simplest way would be
to call the police but...
Someone has to go there.
You know what I think?
Do you?
He can go!
What do you say, Witek?
He was the one in
the green jacket!
We can't go.
We're very unpopular there
and we could only make things worse.
But you... Give it a try.
Comrade Adam spoke well of him,
didn't he?
- Would you do it?
- I can go...
But what should I do
when I get there?
Calm them down.
Do whatever it takes
to calm them down.
We'll be here, by the phone.
Keep the line open.
- He'll need a car.
- What about the list?
What list?
- Who are Buzek and Idziak?
- Look them up, will you?
Idziak is a film director,
Buzek, an aircraft engineer.
Well then, put on your jacket.
You'll be there in an hour.
He'll do it!
- Our men are on stand-by.
- OK. I'm going.
- Who is it?
- From the Warsaw Council.
Your ID.
From Warsaw.
We've met before.
- Długosz. The Warsaw Council.
- Hi.
- We have ten of those.
- It'll all burn down in ten minutes.
- Warsaw area code?
- 8.
Like in America, isn't it?
Długosz speaking.
I'm here.
The doctors are here.
Locked up.
No, I just got here.
Looks like the director's office.
Bye.
It's the counselor's office.
The director's office is much nicer.
Isn't it?
He has a palm plant there!
Look, pal,
since you guys took over, a girl
and two boys have pulled the plug.
They what?
Offed themselves. She with poison,
the other two hanged themselves.
One spent four days in this cage.
And before?
No one, ever.
- What are your demands?
- Can't you read?
Cancel the party's patronage,
bring back the old staff
and restore the hospital status.
- You're in charge?
- Yes. He's a doctor.
She's our therapist.
- Where's the rest?
- Got away when it started.
- Can I talk to them?
- Let him.
- I'm not sure what to do.
- Try to get us out of here.
- Who was in charge before?
- Helpless suckers who wanted
to treat addiction with persuasion
while drugs were being smuggled in.
- But there were no suicides.
- We saved one.
And we were cleared
of any negligence with the other two.
- Time's up!
- You think they would burn the place?
Sure. They're nuts.
These three and the rest!
We're not afraid.
Like in America?
- Can you call a meeting?
- I can.
Roll calls in the morning,
then press reviews.
They locked us up, read our letters
and searched our parcels.
Finally, they banned all visitors.
Gestapo!
And they've made me
a group leader.
Do I look like a group leader?
I barely knew the old director,
but I thought he liked us.
He liked Staszek, too.
They caged him
for making love to me.
Staszek was the one
who hanged himself.
We're roaming the world
in search of a brand new life.
We keep looking forward
to yet another love.
- We are different...
- A call for you.
that's why you
don't want to know us.
We are different
but capable of so much...
Hello?
Yeah, a meeting.
Hold on.
Jump!
Hurry.
They got away! They ran!
Bring the fuel cans!
Gasoline!
Everyone to the corridor!
Spill it! Quickly!
Run! I'm staying.
Stop! Don't do it!
You got me!
Get him!
Bring the buckets and bowls!
It's too slow from the cans.
Use the bowls.
Lock it!
Did you hear?
What?
I stayed so they didn't
burn the place down!
Yes, three demands.
I think they're right!
We're waiting till eight,
then we'll burn it all.
It's just water. To test
how it spills.
Relax.
You got off to a good start.
That moment of weakness helped.
- I was scared.
- I know.
But you should know that
such moments can be useful.
Such a moment of weakness
makes you just like them.
They drop their guard
and you gain the upper hand.
You shouldn't have said
they were right.
They were.
But why say that in front of them?
If better timed, the truth can serve
a purpose - add to your prestige,
- help obtain concessions...
- I wanted to play fair.
You were there in
an official capacity.
If you were there as a private person,
you'd have acted differently.
Why?
I was alone.
No. You had a phone, the police
and the authorities to fall back on.
Otherwise, you'd have
been scared.
- Krystyna, this is Mr. Długosz.
- Hello.
Was it you who called us
last year, before Werner left?
Yes.
We used to be friends long ago...
He told me.
He told me many things.
- About prison?
- That too.
Had he been released first,
our lives would have gone differently.
He'd be here now.
You think it was blind chance?
He was beaten into a false confession.
It's a matter of character.
I was beaten.
But for the next fifteen years
I've exercised my legs.
He didn't have a purpose.
How can one believe in something
that almost destroyed him?
Every idea has its period of errors.
The Inquisition did worse things,
yet people died at the stake
having faith in God.
Then, John XXIII breathed new life
into the Church.
Are you sure this period
of errors won't happen again?
- In this country?
- Yes.
Am I sure? Right now,
in this country,
everything's falling apart.
Those who govern are helpless.
This system is doomed.
It's just a matter of time.
Is that what you think?
- And you say it?
- Out loud? Yes.
Why to me?
Because those at
the top won't listen.
I need someone to back me up.
Maybe people like you?
- So what should be done?
- Adam!
Excuse me.
The scissors...
- What was I saying?
- I asked what should be done.
You have to be on the inside.
Nothing can be improved
from the outside.
When all of this
comes tumbling down
someone has to be there
to pick up the pieces.
Who?
You, me... Someone.
We can't leave this
country to them, can we?
You know what terrifies me?
Losing freedom. Being under
somebody's thumb.
This is an organization.
With my position, nothing
I do will go unnoticed.
And I accept that.
I have no position to speak of
and yet you know
what I said or didn't say
at that detox center.
Because you've made the first step.
Let's start all over again. Try.
What for?
I need to know everything about you.
If we're to be together.
If we're to be at all...
- Do you get it?
- I do.
So start talking!
My first time was
with a guy at a scout camp.
I had my panties on.
Very uncomfortable.
His pal next to us pretended to be
asleep and panted throughout.
I had to pull my tight panties aside
and ended up chafed.
- Did it hurt?
- The chafing?
No.
It did.
I had three abortions.
Once, when I was in love.
Two others were accidents.
First one was done at the hospital.
It was disgusting.
They shaved me.
Private doctors don't do that.
How many more guys?
- Exact number?
- Yeah.
Six. No, seven.
Including a one-night stand.
He bit me right here.
- Where?
- Here.
We had sex in a hotel.
In The European.
Where else?
With the others.
In a bed, in a bathroom, once in
a car, once in a toilet...
I love you.
I love you, too.
I really wanted to find you
these past eighteen months.
I tried the dorm several times.
I would come to your door.
Always too afraid to ring the bell.
What's wrong, bosun?
They just keep bringing more.
Two boats are already full.
- If there's a search...
- What then?
Nothing. Never mind.
He's complaining that you're
stashing illegal prints here.
Have to stash them somewhere
until we can distribute them.
- You have a lot?
- Quite a lot.
Who's that guy?
He's all right.
Witek!
- Hi.
Shouldn't you keep these out of sight?
Brandys.
Konwicki. Have you read it?
"The Polish Complex"?
You can buy it from him.
What will our homeland be like?
It'll be different - just,
noble and wise.
A role model for all of Europe; risen
from the blood of her best sons.
They distribute those themselves?
No. We're taking them to Gdańsk,
Kraków or Szczecin.
And local boys
distribute them there.
A helluva system.
- What are you doing here?
- I'm with a girl.
Chili!
Look what I've bought.
- Here?
- Yeah.
Funny that you have
your boat here.
Why?
They keep those illegal books
a hundred yards from you.
- Are they fine boys? How many of them?
- They're great. And quite a few.
That's how I imagined scout
resistance during the war.
Well organized, nationwide.
Good to have the likes of them
on your side.
They're the ones with black
neckerchiefs?
Is she in it too?
I'm not asking for names.
It's just good to know
what's going on.
And to have our own sources
not just relying on someone else's.
Take this into consideration.
- Meaning what?
- Just think about it.
Are you going to the meeting
with the French in July?
- Probably. I don't know yet.
- When is Werner due back?
Soon, I think.
I'll see you.
She'll be sailing the seas!
- What are you drinking?
- Vodka. I'm getting drunk.
- Are you alive?
- Yeah.
- The Polish emblem?
- White Eagle.
- When were you born?
- June 1956, in Poznań.
So was I, but in Łódź.
Tanks had just rolled onto
the streets.
Father worked at the riot-hit
plant, stayed there overnight.
Mother went into labor,
headed to the hospital,
gave birth to us and died.
Us?
Me and my brother. I'm alive
because I was born first.
I seem to remember that moment.
It's in my mind's eye.
- How intelligent!
- And bold! To talk publicly...
Speak of the devil. Your speech
was a real eye-opener.
That's what I wanted.
Very daring indeed.
- Do you have a moment?
- Yes. Excuse me.
- It looks like you'll be elected.
- I don't know.
It really matters
who you step aside with.
It'll take time to tell you all
about their political system.
Just look what they manufacture.
Press here and you get a calculator.
Here, and it shows you
time and date.
And here is a stopwatch
accurate to one hundredth of a second.
Give it a try.
Push right here.
See? Each number plays
its own musical note.
Now try to set the alarm.
Ten tunes to choose from.
Tiny, but it does it all.
You're doing very well.
Getting promoted...
Yes. I'm on the Main Council.
What's that?
Go on, push it.
As if it died.
I didn't want to come to your place.
There is a problem...
Yeah. Werner is back.
It isn't that. We need a new
way to meet. I'll call you.
Why?
They found the books,
arrested two of the boys,
took out the printing press...
All at once.
Ms. Olkowski?
Your ID, please.
Yours too.
Ah, it's you...
You come with me.
Comrade Adam is busy now.
What's with you, motherfuckers?
Lost your hands?
You calmed down?
Do we call the police?
No. Kick the fucker out!
And keep your mouths
shut about it!
I'm moving out!
You showed me it's OK
to believe in something
and I trusted you like a fool!
When I showed my Party Card
to my aunt,
she said her life hadn't
been wasted, and wept.
Screw her tears!
Screw your combatant stories!
This idea is about you having
power and doing what you want!
- I haven't done anything for years.
- That's even worse.
People get arrested everywhere.
Even women.
That buddy of yours
made me a snitch.
That's why I messed up his face.
With this hand,
I messed up his face.
I know.
He called me.
Wait.
You forgot your ticket to Paris.
Excuse me, Dean!
You'll lose your paper.
Chili!
I answered all their questions
with "I don't know".
I don't know... I don't know...
- Did they beat you?
- No.
The officer was handsome.
Fair hair, blue eyes, blue jeans.
He looked like...
Like that one!
I'll be right back.
You got me out and came
for your reward?
Shall I strip?
I didn't get you out.
- I seem to have lost my bearings.
- You were to go to France.
I don't want to go.
Go. And when you come back, marry
a Politburo member's daughter.
Call me when you
become a minister
so I can spit in your face because now
I pity you too much for that.
Jesus...
Hi. Taking the globe along?
I've moved out and have
no place to store it.
Hi.
Have some room in your bag?
Take this for me, will you?
But be careful. It's crystal.
Careful.
Hi.
I'm Długosz.
- We've met before.
- At the detox center.
I'm grateful that you pulled me
out of that madhouse.
- What are we waiting for?
- The passports. Speak of the devil!
I have the passports
but there's a problem.
Strikes have begun...
In Świdnik, on the railway
in Lublin and in a factory in Łódź.
We have people in those places.
The trip has been canceled.
You're needed out there.
Are you blind?
- You'll break your neck!
- Sorry.
He spilled my change...
A beer, please.
A student ticket to Warsaw.
One to Łomża.
Władek! Stop him!
Call the police!
The only censored fragment
of the film lost beyond retrieval.
- Name?
- Długosz. Witek Długosz.
Born?
June 27th, 1956. In Poznań.
- Poznań?
- Yes.
You're a student?
Yes. On Dean's leave.
First, he got into a fight with me,
then he beat a policeman
and tussled with my colleague.
A week ago I caught him
urinating at the station.
I didn't report it,
but that was him.
- Is that true?
- No.
We find the defendant guilty
and sentence him to thirty days
of supervised community work.
Kiss my ass.
- Pardon me?
- Nothing.
I hope the punishment will serve
its educational purpose.
In 1957, we're fourth-year university
students. Twenty years from now...
- Got some wine?
- No, sorry.
Włodek will be
a deputy Prime Minister,
Staszek - a minister,
Karol - an editor-in-chief.
Jan will be abroad with an annual
income of at least $100,000.
We'll dig it out in April 1977.
All signed.
Sons of bitches. They didn't
come to get it. It's May.
No last names, unfortunately.
What are you here for?
A railroad guard picked a fight
with me. And you?
- The FU.
- What?
The Flying University.
I was making my apartment
available for lectures
and a neighbor filed
a disturbance complaint.
What shall we do with this?
We'll put it back. Maybe they'll
retrieve it from under the eagle.
Any deputy Prime Ministers
named Włodek?
I don't know.
Wait. Something's
on the other side.
"I dug it up in 1975.
Every night I thank God
that you guys didn't make it. Jan."
Marek.
- Witek Długosz.
- No last names!
Why not?
- Who told you all those things?
- My father.
Mine died two weeks ago.
I wasn't there.
He told me over the phone
there was nothing I had to do.
Then he gave me the same
message through a doctor we knew.
What did you have to do?
He wanted me to be
a decent man, a doctor.
I don't know what he meant.
I'm told he didn't want to die.
Though he seemed
resigned to his fate.
Hi.
- Meet Stefan.
- Witek Dłu... Witek!
- New?
- New and clean.
Here you go.
"The Worker" and other prints.
And 4000 for the books.
Try to get something by Burek,
about literature,
Górnicki's about the Church and Kowalik's
"Social System". Much sought after.
Seven in total. Give it
to the free unions.
The phone number's inside.
Couldn't he deliver it?
He could, for starters.
- Sure. Call and what?
- Arrange to meet.
- Do I mention you, father?
- Call me Stefan.
It's hard, damn it...
I was here a month ago.
I missed my train...
If I hadn't, we wouldn't
have met.
It's not just blind chance.
Sometimes I think it is.
You forgot something, gentlemen?
No. It's me.
I called yesterday.
What happened?
- Did Stefan send you?
- The priest, yes. What happened?
Nothing happened.
I have the money for you.
7,000.
Thank you.
I saw them... Bastards!
Well, it's not
really their fault.
It's not a big deal,
I'll clean up.
You've been with us long?
Not really.
- You didn't know such things happen?
- I didn't.
Don't be ashamed.
No need to be. Everyone's
ashamed.
I'll help you.
You dropped something.
- So, what happened?
- They brought flowers.
On behalf of the
workers, they said.
Thanked me for helping those
who got fired or are oppressed.
And for anti-government leaflets.
It was really quite pleasant.
I offered to make
some coffee.
Suddenly, the tallest of them
grabbed the table and threw it over.
They were done in five minutes.
Weren't you scared?
No. I'm living on
borrowed time.
The surgery was to give me
three years. It's been twelve.
If God gave me life,
I have nothing to fear.
I was scared. For a moment.
I didn't know it can get that bad.
I have nothing else to be scared of.
Good for you.
- I have no one to worry about me.
- Same here.
My parents and my husband are dead.
There's no one left to worry about.
You really think it was God
who saved your life?
Who else could have?
Trust me, He can come to you
if you do what He expects.
If you help others,
He may come.
Or try and invite Him yourself.
He'll understand.
They asked Mother Teresa
what can you give a man
half an hour before his death?
The faith that he's not
alone, she said.
I was alone for a while
but you came
and I'm not any more.
I'm glad you came.
Are you looking for someone?
Witek, you're being followed.
Am I?
Not possible.
What exactly are you up to?
I don't like it, when they call me buddy,
pat me on the shoulder with a grin,
name me their "friend"or"brother",
greet me with: "Hello, long time no see!"
I don't like it, when they read my letters,
look over my shoulder to take a peek.
I hate those who gladly break one's
face as a shortcut to saving the world.
I detest the helpless expression
of an animal shot at point blank range.
I abhor the coincidental fashion which
they use to block your road to change.
I can't stand unaccountable reasons,
irreparable losses make me sick.
I hate counting unfulfilled wishes
till the hangman hears the last I pick.
I detest it when a crackling noise
can be heard when I try to make a call.
Shots in the back of someone's head
are an abomination to me.
I hate myself when I flinch,
trying to excuse mean acts on my part,
smile ingratiatingly at those I serve
though I despise them with all my heart.
Smile ingratiatingly at those I serve
See you. To your right, OK?
You go left.
Wait a moment...
OK, to your right.
- See you in two weeks.
- Good!
Can I buy your record?
Sure. Over here.
- Two please.
- Out and to your left.
Daniel?
You don't recognize me?
To your right.
It's Witek!
Summer of 1968. You were
leaving for Denmark.
Witek!
Hi!
My sister Wera.
- You're back for good?
- No, just a few days.
Our mother passed away.
Relax. I'll check.
We'll stay, huh?
It's my apartment.
If you do it again, I'll inform
the authorities.
Cigarette?
- My aunt wants to call the police.
- Why?
She's a pre-war communist,
a governor's widow.
When we moved in
we had doors walled up,
so it's a bit of a patchwork,
with stairs to the kitchen.
Will she call them?
No, she's a good woman.
She thinks I'm being spiteful.
And when she's really mad,
she addresses me as "comrade".
- What are you smoking?
- "Sports". First thing I bought.
She divorced our father
before we left and lived alone.
Her neighbors were alarmed
by bottles of milk
lined up on the doorstep
and discovered that she died.
How's your father?
I only saw him briefly.
He builds highways in Denmark.
We have a house and all.
He got used to it, I can't.
Can't get over the feeling
that I'm some place distant.
What does it mean?
"I'm happy in this happy little
country." In Danish.
Why didn't you
go with them?
- I didn't want to.
- She fell in love.
- Really?
- Yes.
It was 1968. Someone yelled
"Jews go to Israel!" at her.
A young man ran up
and punched that shouter in the face.
She fell for him then and there.
He got expelled from the university
and she ended up marrying him.
He's an aircraft engineer.
Back then, I had no idea
why you had to leave.
- How old were you, Wera?
- Eighteen.
- And we were...?
- Twelve.
I remember us saying goodbye.
Your father called you
to follow him uphill, to the car.
There was no car.
- Will you come back to Łódź?
- Yes, I will. Soon.
Look for me.
You're here for a reason?
- To get baptized.
- What?
I'd like to get baptized.
Are you nuts?
Whatever for?
So I know what to live for.
It brings reassurance
and peace of mind to so many people.
You, for example.
True. But you also need faith.
I think I've it because
I know what to do.
I want to voice my objections
instead of being passive.
- Then join the Party.
- I won't find enlightenment there.
Do you pray?
No.
Try it sometime.
Oh Lord!
It's done.
I've been baptized.
Here I am.
All the formalities are behind me.
And now I ask you... to be.
I'm ready, I'm baptized.
So please, don't fail to be.
I can't back out now.
I promise to never bother you again.
Just be.
Oh Lord...
998...
999...
1000.
Time for eggs!
- How many do you want?
- Two.
Shorty!
Change of shift, wake up!
- How many eggs you want?
- Three, please.
Or make it two.
Quiet!
- Hi.
- Got anything for me to take?
- We do, two thousand copies.
- Hi!
- Hi.
You haven't met? Shorty,
introduce yourself.
Staszek is the son of my Dean
at the Medical Academy.
Marek.
I brought you something to read.
- How about something normal to eat?
- I got eggs.
Gee...
What is that?
The Polish Independence Agreement.
- Here's your passport. Got a visa?
- Yes. And a flight reservation.
What's the purpose of your trip?
A Catholic youth rally outside Paris.
An international event.
Your passport is ready, but it's not
as simple as that.
You were in contact
with various people,
got arrested for illegal prints,
- organized meetings at your apartment...
- I only made it available.
Never mind.
We don't want you
to tell on your friends.
We know enough.
But you'll meet
new people in France
and we want to know
who they are.
And what's going on.
We'll provide a phone number
and you'll call with the names.
We can even narrow it down
to French citizens.
And if I agree?
You'll get your passport.
Watch out.
He almost hit you.
I saved her from being run over.
- I hadn't noticed.
- Come.
What a strange day.
Unlike any other.
Why?
I visited my mother.
And?
Nothing. I visited her grave.
I have a grave to visit now.
Like everybody else.
I didn't have one before.
I came from nowhere.
You don't understand
what it's like, do you?
It's all in your imagination.
No.
You must have had
a grandpa, a grandma...
Everyone has them.
You must have ancestors.
I know nothing about them.
My mother never told me.
Then it was too late to ask.
I don't know who they were,
where they are.
I know nothing.
Two of my great-grandfathers
fought in the 1863 uprising.
One grandfather fought
the Soviets in 1920.
Father fought in 1939,
and in workers' protests in 1956...
He died in his bed
three years ago.
You have them all close by.
I never thought of that.
What did your father tell you
when he was dying?
How do you know?
He wanted to tell me something
but kept putting it off.
I would call him repeatedly
to make sure he was alive.
He'd been dying for months.
I'd hang up when he answered.
So as not to constantly ask
how he was.
He knew it was me
and why I was calling.
The tea is good.
In my fourth year,
during an autopsy,
a student had a funny look
on her face.
They were cutting
up her teacher.
One she hated.
She told me she fantasized
about doing it herself.
Why am I telling you this?
Because I told you the plot
of the movie "Manhattan".
We've been talking for so long
there must be nothing left to say.
I don't think so.
There are many things
you can't tell anyone.
You have such things?
I do.
And you wouldn't tell me?
I wouldn't.
- About fear?
- Yes.
What else?
A few things about my father...
About God...
- God?
- God.
About my crooked toe...
And there's something
I wouldn't know how to tell you.
But you would like to or not?
I couldn't. Something about you,
and perhaps about me.
You're sleepy?
No.
Get up, I'll show you something.
- I'm cold.
- Just a moment.
Found it.
Is this what we came to see?
There was a note inside.
From the past, about the future.
And how it all turned out.
But it's gone now.
You were to go to France.
I won't. I didn't get
the passport.
It was to be my first
international flight.
My husband works on
international flights. I always...
You told me before.
You didn't want
to sleep with me...
I did.
- Do you believe in God?
- I do.
- Really?
- Yes.
- Were you baptized?
- Recently.
What's it like?
The priest asks if you want to
accept the Catholic faith.
- And what do you say?
- That I do.
Witek!
A giveaway?
Where were you?
Where are the guys?
In jail.
You were supposed to be here.
Where were you?
Are you suspecting me?
The key.
- And don't ever come here again.
- Man... Fuck!
Get the fuck out!
No, I won't!
Don't you get it?
Then wait. Things will
clear up.
What about me?
Pray, so that you won't come
to hate those who accused you.
And always remember
that this is a conspiracy.
The responsibility is twofold.
Suspicion is hard
to shake off.
You'll come to France with us.
We'll have plenty of time there.
- You will calm down.
- I'm not going.
Excuse me,
northbound buses?
- Over there.
- Thank you.
Yes?
- Is Wera home?
- No, she's not.
- When will she be back?
- I don't know.
I'm a friend of her brother's.
She went to Łódź.
I came to see you but you
weren't here. Waited four hours, Wera.
- Did you hear?
- Hear what?
Wait.
That girl who stayed with you
for a few days. Was she Jewish?
Yes.
Many Jews were
great communists.
I know.
What are you listening to?
Free Europe.
Today, strikes began
in a number of Polish cities.
Workers at the URSUS tractor
factory are protesting...
It's a good thing you haven't
left the country right now.
The train to Warsaw East Station
will depart from Platform 2.
Are you blind?
- You'll break your neck!
- Sorry!
He spilled my change.
A beer, please.
A student ticket to Warsaw.
One to Łomża.
What are you doing here?
I called you. Your aunt said
you were leaving.
- I wanted to see you off.
- I missed it by five seconds.
I looked for you after the funeral.
Remember our first time? On the floor
in the Students' Union room.
I won't be signing
anything now.
Leave your credit books
in my office. I have to go.
You're here to see me?
Yes. I just don't know
how to begin.
I'm listening.
You approved my
Dean's leave.
Yes, I remember.
Is there something wrong?
I'd like to come back.
I'll catch up.
I thought about it and...
You said you lost your calling.
It came back.
It doesn't show, I'm afraid.
Although...
Yes?
I have to tell you something.
I'm three months pregnant.
- You really want to marry me?
- I do.
- Aware of the rights and duties
- that result from starting a family
- I solemnly declare
- that I take Olga Matwiszyn
- to be my lawful wedded wife.
GRADUATION 1978
I wanted to talk to you.
I'd like to offer you
an academic position.
I wanted to work at a hospital
or at the ambulance service.
Why not? We won't keep
you very busy here.
You can complete specialty training,
get your M.D.
I've been almost too lucky lately.
- Does it worry you?
- No.
- Here are the prescriptions.
- Can't she be placed somewhere?
I'll bring the medicines.
Come with me, please.
I'll come by every few days.
Just don't give her up, OK?
It won't be long now.
A month or two.
What are they doing?
Practicing. They have been
for ten years now.
What for?
Nothing. They say no one else
can throw so many balls at once.
- Who talked to you?
- The first secretary.
And another guy,
I don't know him.
They promised to give me
an assistant position
and to fast track my M.D.
They did, didn't they? And?
I don't want it. But how do I
tell them?
- Do you believe in God?
- No.
That doesn't matter.
Tell them that you do
and that your worldview
couldn't accommodate both.
Yeah... They can't read my mind.
When I had such visitors, I would say
I didn't believe in the Party.
But don't tell them that.
It always made them angry.
But why won't you
accept their offer?
They're right.
Life is much easier
for Party members.
What they're doing
is an abomination.
No. I don't want to.
You've got
milk whiskers.
- I hear you got an offer.
- How do you know?
From the hospital.
They say you refused.
You want me to sing it
every night in bed?
We've been administering it
for a week.
Any improvement?
Here's his previous
ECG to compare.
Doctor...
The heart rate has slowed down...
- Yes?
- Can you spare a few minutes?
Excuse me.
Can you see the difference?
- Good morning.
- Hi. What is it?
We're collecting signatures
from academics.
For what?
Students are given a hard time
for distributing pamphlets
and for the Flying University.
This one. Who's he?
They want to expel him.
For distribution.
- But who is he?
- Our Dean's son.
That's why the Dean
didn't sign.
Rumor has it you refused
to join the Party.
- I did, but I won't sign this either.
- Why not?
I don't want to get involved
on either side.
It's only human to be scared.
I'm not scared.
I'm a doctor because I want to
be accountable for what I do.
And to do it myself.
Fucker.
Hello?
Good evening, sir.
Don't worry about it.
Of course, no problem.
Train station? I'll be right there.
Thank you for coming.
I know it's late.
No problem, sir.
I want to ask a personal favor.
You know my son got arrested.
I'm going to Warsaw...
Anyway...
You see, I was to go
to Libya in about a month.
But now they won't let me.
- He went away for distributing leaflets?
- Yes.
I didn't sign the protest letter.
I know. Back then
I thought you were right.
Now I'm not so sure.
I couldn't.
I want to be impartial.
You're a decent man,
that's all that really matters.
I came to ask you
to replace me on that trip.
You know my methods. It's just
a few consultations and lectures.
I have them written down.
- No need to answer today.
- I'll go, no problem.
Hear me out before
you say yes.
I can't think of anyone else
willing to help me out.
I probably won't be
Dean much longer.
They'll probably remove me
from the Academy altogether.
I think they'll let you out
of the country
but bear in mind it may be
your last trip for years to come.
I wanted you to know that
and to think about it.
If you decide to go,
call me.
Otherwise just forget we met.
Sir, I've decided.
I'll go.
It happens to be
my wife's birthday
- so I'd like to reschedule if possible.
- I'll see what can be done.
I love her so much.
There is a flight on the 11th,
via Paris.
It's a foreign airline,
I'll check if you can fly with them.
I like your lighter.
Your ticket was purchased abroad
so there's no problem.
I'll check seat availability,
then change your ticket.
- When can I come back?
- In a couple of days.
Great.
We're cleaning up?
Go to bed.
I'll empty the ashtrays
and tidy up a bit.
Will you see me off to Warsaw?
To the airport?
You know I'm on call.
- Don't go.
- You mean it?
- No.
- My mind's made up.
I want to go.
I was watching you one night...
And?
Nothing.
Write to tell me what you thought
when you heard this.
Heard what?
We're going to have a daughter.
A daughter?
- Do you have a light?
- Sure.
Thank you.
Passengers departing to Paris
on flight 277
are kindly requested to proceed
to Gates 3 and 4.
Enjoy your flight.
Cast of characters
Directed by
Director of Photography
Production Manager
Sound
Music by
Production Designer
Edited by
Special appearance by